ETL Project - Colleges Database
Technical Report:
By:
Yulia Kindziayeva
Dana Zhang

Extraction:

To complete this project, we found two CSV files. First file includes general information such as location, contact information, size  of US post secondary education facilities as defined by the Integrated PostSecondary Education System (Colleges_and_Universities.csv). Another table includes information such as admissions rate, in and out of state tuition, students’ demographic information etc. for 2017 - 2018 academic year  (MERGED2017_18_PP.csv).  Links to both files are provided below under Resources.

MERGED2017_18_PP.csv was from the College Scorecard of the Department of Education
And Colleges_and_Universities.csv was generated by the Department of Homeland Security.

Both dataset had IDs for each institution, which originated from Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). In the College Scorecard data, the IDs were labeled as UNITID, and in the Department of Homeland Security, the IDs were labeled as IPEDSID. We verified that these IDs remain consistent in both files by performing a randomized check to guarantee the IDs matched.

Transform:

Since both data files were csv, we used pandas to transform the data. We first comb through each dataset to find the relevant data in each set, filtering out what we needed. To standardize the columns, we renamed each column keeping all the column names lowercase. Then, we dropped colleges with incomplete data and dropped duplicates (just in case). Next, we set indexes in both data frames to ipedsid column and defined ipedsid fields as primary key in both tables in pgAdmin. We created  two dataframes to load to pgAdmin: student_choice and college_choice. The data frame student_choice contained information regarding the type of college, its location, and contact information. The dataset college_choice had average test scores, admission rates and tuition for in state and out of state.

Load: 

We used sqlalchemy to load the data into pgAdmin. Using Pandas, we created a database connection and loaded the data into the tables. Then we check to make sure the data tables were loaded with a read_sql_query function.
We created a SQL table for each dataset and joined them on the ipedsid key. 


Reference Links:
College scorecard raw data - MERGED2017_18_PP
https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/college-scorecard/resource/2a7f670e-0799-436a-9394-df0a9b3ba7c5

Colleges_and_Universities 
https://hifld-geoplatform.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/colleges-and-universities
(https://services1.arcgis.com/Hp6G80Pky0om7QvQ/arcgis/rest/services/Colleges_and_Universities/FeatureServer/0)

